---
layout: post
title:  "Fourier Transform on Three-Dimensional Objects"
date:   2018-02-25 20:09:02 +0100
categories: fourier
---

This post is still in draft stage! I'll finish it up as soon as I find some time to write again.

$$ \newcommand{\Reals}[]{\mathbb{R}} $$
$$ \newcommand{\Complexes}[]{\mathbb{C}} $$
$$ \newcommand{\Naturals}[]{\mathbb{N}} $$
$$ \newcommand{\Fourier}[]{\mathcal{F}} $$
$$ \newcommand{\code}[1]{\verb ! #1 !} $$
$$ \newcommand{\times}{\cdot} $$

# Motivation

Like many people I first got into working with the Fourier transform when learning to work with music. It was neat how you could take a signal, find out what notes it consisted of and then adjust the signal to your liking by doing simple operations in the Fourier domain. For example you could add an octave on top of the most important note by just adding another frequency to the signal.

Really, a musical signal is only just a function of time, or, in more technical terms, a mapping $\Reals \to \Reals $. However, there is no reason why we should limit ourselves to only such functions. What about mappings of the form $ A^n \to B $, or $ A^n \to B^m $? It turns out that there is a way to decompose these functions into frequencies as well!

This opens up a whole new world of interesting transformations. For example, grayscale pictures can be viewed as a function mapping x- and y-coordinates onto a pixel-value between 0 and 255. Geometrical objects are commonly described as a mapping of some parameters to a vector $[x, y, z]$. 

What I initially found fascinating about the Fourier transform was how you could modify musical signals. Now that we have learned that you can just as well apply the Fourier transformation to geometrical objects, let's find out what it means to modify them in the Fourier domain! Is there such a thing as "adding an octave to a sphere"? If so, what would the sphere look like?


# A little bit of theory

Let's first back up a little bit. What does it actually mean to get the Fourier representation of a signal? Feel free to skip to the next section if you want to go to out implementation immediately.

Consider an inner product space $S$ with orthogonal base $B_S$. Any $\vec{s} \in S$ can be represented as a combination of the basevectors $\vec{b}_n \in B_S$, such that

$$\vec{s} = \sum \alpha_n \vec{b}_n $$

Since $B_S$ is orthogonal, the coefficients $\alpha_n$ are easy to obtain:

$$ \alpha_n = < \vec{s}, \vec{b_n} > $$

All this holds for any orthogonal base. One such base would be the Fourier-base, consisting of functions of the form $e^{2 \pi i f t}, \forall f$. But how is a Fourier base special? Really, there isn't all that much special about the Fourier base, except that the coefficients $\alpha_n$ have a neat interpretation: they are the amplitudes of a wave with frequency $f_n$.

The Fourier Transform is a transform on $B$ that changes the base of $B$ to a set of functions that can be viewed as sine waves. If the signal we want to represent does indeed have some wave-like properties, this representation may be a lot more concise. Choosing to represent a signal by it's Fourier coefficients is a bit like choosing to describe a piece of music by it's notesheet instead of, say, a wav file. The information content remains the same, but from the notesheet we can extract some information way more easily from a notesheet than from the raw values of the wav file. Most people will be able to get at least a vague impression of a song from it's notes, but very few will be able to read *anything* out of the long list of speaker-positions that make out a wav file.


# An analytically solvable example

Soon we will make use of numpy's $\code{fft}$ methods to switch between the orinary- and the frequency-representation of a signal numerically. But to ensure that our program works as intended, it makes sense to first work out an analytical example. Well fist define the body we want to work with, then do the Fourier transformation, then alter the spectrum to "add an octave onto the body", and finally do a backtransform to see what new body we have obtained. 

### The body

Consider the ellipsoid $\vec{b}(\theta, \phi)$, which can be parameterized as:

$$ x = \cos(\theta) \cos(\phi) $$ \\
$$ y = \cos(\theta) \sin(\phi) $$ \\
$$ z = \sin(\theta)  $$ 

This is a vector valued function, a mapping from $ \Theta \times \Phi \to \Reals^3 $. Usually, we'd now have to find a Fourier-base consisting of functions of the same form, but things bekome a lot easier when we realize that we can decompose this signal into one-dimensional functions: 

$$\vec{b}(\theta, \phi) = \vec{x} b_x(\theta, \phi) + \vec{y} b_y(\theta, \phi) + \vec{z} b_z(\theta, \phi) $$

### Fourier transform

Accordingly, the Fourier-decomposition can be split the same way:

$$ \Fourier(\vec{b}(\theta, \phi)) = \vec{x} \Fourier(b_x(\theta, \phi)) + \vec{y} \Fourier(b_y(\theta, \phi)) + \vec{z} \Fourier(b_z(\theta, \phi)) $$

Let us for now only consider the $x$-direction. Here we have: 

$$ \alpha_x(f_\theta, f_\phi) = \Fourier(b_x(\theta, \phi)) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \cos(\theta) \cos(\phi) e^{-2 \pi i (\theta f_\theta + \phi f_\phi)} d\theta d\phi $$

This seems like a daunting integral to solve at first, but we can neatly separate the $\theta$- and $\phi$-terms, yielding a much simpler product of integrals: 

$$  \alpha_x(f_\theta, f_\phi) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \cos(\theta) e^{-2 \pi i \theta f_\theta} d\theta   \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \cos(\phi) e^{-2 \pi i \phi f_\phi} d\phi  $$ 

This is very handy for us, for now we can just solve these terms like we were dealing with a one-dimensional transform. We obtain:

 $$ \alpha_x(f_\theta, f_\phi) = \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ]  $$

 The transform is just as simple for the $y$- and $z$-direction. Working through all dimensions, we obtain: 

 $$ \alpha_x(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ]  $$ 

$$ \alpha_y(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{2\pi}) - \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ]  $$ 

$$ \alpha_z(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) - \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \delta(f_\phi) $$ 


### Altering the spectrum 

Here is the part where we may be a little creative. Now that we know the amplitudes of the frequencies of $\vec{b}$ in the Fourier-domain, what does it mean to add an octave to those frequencies? Well, what did it mean when we added an octave to a musical signal? It meant that a second spike would appear at twice the frequency of the original note. If our sound-sample had a frequency-spectrum like this: 

$$ \alpha(f) = \delta(f - 440) $$

... then adding an octave would mean creating a new spectum like this: 

$$ \alpha'(f) = \delta(f - 440)  + \delta(f - 880) $$

Now there are a few ways in which we could create an equivalent operation for our ellipsoids frequency spectrum, but a simple one would be this: 

$$ \alpha_x(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] +  \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{\pi}) + \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{\pi}) ] $$ 

$$ \alpha_y(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{2\pi}) - \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] +  \frac{1}{2}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{\pi}) + \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{\pi}) ] \frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\phi - \frac{1}{\pi}) - \delta(f_\phi + \frac{1}{\pi}) ] $$ 

$$ \alpha_z(f_\theta, f_\phi) = 
\frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{2\pi}) - \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{2\pi}) ] \delta(f_\phi) +  \frac{1}{2i}[ \delta(f_\theta - \frac{1}{\pi}) - \delta(f_\theta + \frac{1}{\pi}) ] \delta(f_\phi) $$ 

All we did here was this: for each dimension, take the signal, move it such that spikes appear at twice the frequency they did before, and add that altered signal to the original. We could have opted to only move the signal along the axis of $f_\theta$ or only along $f_\phi$, but for now it might make sense to stick to a simple method. 


### Backtransform 

Transforming the signal back to the spacial representation is just as easy as it was to obtain the Fourier transformation. In the end we'll obtain a new body $\vec{b}'(\theta, \phi)$ which is parameterized as: 

$$ x = \cos(\theta) \cos(\phi) + \cos(2\theta) \cos(2\phi)  $$ \\
$$ y = \cos(\theta) \sin(\phi) + \cos(2\theta) \sin(2\phi)$$ \\
$$ z = \sin(\theta) + \sin(2\theta)  $$ 

Plotted, this body looks like this: 

...

Note how the surface of the body wraps around itself a bit like a cardioid does. Pretty, isn't it?

# Numerical implementation

We can take some pride in having deduced the shape of the transformed ellipsoid analytically, but if we want to repeat this stunt on arbitrary shapes, we better create some numerical method to do this kind of work for us. 

So lets repeat our results, but this time do all steps numerically using python's $\code{fft}$ library. 

### The body

First, lets get some samples of our ellipsoid-body. 


```python
import numpy as np


r1 = r2 = r3 = 1
def body(theta, phi):
    x = r1 * np.cos(theta) * np.cos(phi)
    y = r2 * np.cos(theta) * np.sin(phi)
    z = r3 * np.sin(theta)
	return [x, y, z]


def getSample(thetas, phis, body):
    samples = np.zeros((len(thetas), len(phis), 3))
    for r, theta in enumerate(thetas):
        for c, phi in enumerate(phis):
            samples[r, c, :] = body(theta, phi)
    return samples


steps = 250.0
target = 360.0
delta = target / steps
thetas = np.linspace(0, target, steps)
phis = np.linspace(0, target, steps)
sample = getSample(thetas, phis, body)

```


### Fourier transform

Now lets do the Fourier transform on our sample-data:

```python
def fft(samples):
    amps = np.zeros(np.shape(samples), dtype=np.complex128)
    amps[:,:,0] = np.fft.fft2(samples[:,:,0])
    amps[:,:,1] = np.fft.fft2(samples[:,:,1])
    amps[:,:,2] = np.fft.fft2(samples[:,:,2])
    return amps


amps = fft(sample)
```

 
### Altering the spectrum 

This step requires a little more explanation. 

 - For one, there is the function $\code{addOctaveSingle}$. This function ...
 - Then, there is the function $\code{filterAmps}$. We haven't mentioned any filtering in the article so far. In  fact, the only reason we apply this function is ...

```python

def matrixFilter(filterFunc, matrix):
    matrixNew = np.zeros(matrix.shape, dtype=matrix.dtype)
    for r,row in enumerate(matrix):
        for c,el in enumerate(row):
            if filterFunc(r,c,el):
                matrixNew[r,c] = matrix[r,c]
    return matrixNew


def addOctave(amps):
    ampsNew = np.zeros(amps.shape, dtype=amps.dtype)
    ampsNew[:,:,0] = addOctaveSingle(amps[:,:,0])
    ampsNew[:,:,1] = addOctaveSingle(amps[:,:,1])
    ampsNew[:,:,2] = addOctaveSingle(amps[:,:,2])
    return ampsNew


def addOctaveSingle(amps):
    ampsNew = np.zeros(amps.shape, dtype=amps.dtype)
    R,C = ampsNew.shape
    frqR = np.fft.fftfreq(R, d=delta)
    frqC = np.fft.fftfreq(C, d=delta)
    for r in range(R):
        for c in range(C):
            if r < R/4.0:
                r2 = 2*r
            elif r > 3.0*R/4.0:
                r2 = 2*r - R
            else:
                r2 = None
            if c < C/4.0:
                c2 = 2*c
            elif c > 3.0*C/4.0:
                c2 = 2*c - C
            else:
                c2 = None
            ampsNew[r,c] += amps[r,c]
            if r2 is not None and c2 is not None:
                ampsNew[r2,c2] += amps[r,c]
                if amps[r,c] != 0.0:
                    print("duplicating value {} from {}/{} to {}/{}".format(amps[r,c], r,c, r2,c2))
    return ampsNew

    

def filterAmps(amps, perc):
    ampsNew = np.zeros(amps.shape, dtype=amps.dtype)
    ampsNew[:,:,0] = filterAmpsSingle(amps[:,:,0], perc)
    ampsNew[:,:,1] = filterAmpsSingle(amps[:,:,1], perc)
    ampsNew[:,:,2] = filterAmpsSingle(amps[:,:,2], perc)
    return ampsNew

def filterAmpsSingle(amps, perc):
    thresh = np.max(np.abs(amps)) * perc
    def filterfunc(r, c, val):
        if np.abs(val) > thresh:
            print("retaining {} at {}/{}".format(val, r, c))
            return True
        return False
    ampsNew = matrixFilter(filterfunc, amps)
    return ampsNew

def alter(amps):
    ampsF = filterAmps(amps, 0.96)
    ampsNew = addOctave(ampsF)
    return ampsNew

ampsNew = alter(amps)
```

### Backtransform 

Finally, here is the backtransform from our new amplitudes to a geometric object. This part is fairly selfexplanatory again. 

```python
def ifft(amps):
    samples = np.zeros(np.shape(amps), dtype=amps.dtype)
    samples[:,:,0] = np.fft.ifft2(amps[:,:,0])
    samples[:,:,1] = np.fft.ifft2(amps[:,:,1])
    samples[:,:,2] = np.fft.ifft2(amps[:,:,2])
    return np.real(samples)


sampleNew = ifft(ampsNew)
```